---
title: "Unpacking the Toxic Alpha Male Mindset and Its Societal Repercussions"
slug: toxic-masculinity
coverImage: /images/posts/toxic.jpg
date: 2024-05-31T21:55:15.391Z
excerpt: This paper critically examines the prevalence and impact of alpha male culture, focusing on its digital manifestations. By analyzing harmful stereotypes and power dynamics, we aim to highlight the terrible effects of toxic masculinity on progress and gender equality. Drawing from feminist theories, we explore the motivations behind this movement and its resistance to societal change.

tags:
  - Toxic Masculinity
---

<script>
  import Callout from "$lib/components/molecules/Callout.svelte";
  import CodeBlock from "$lib/components/molecules/CodeBlock.svelte";
  import Image from "$lib/components/atoms/Image.svelte";
</script>

<p style = "text-align: center; font-weight: bold;">by: Aaron Tolentino</p>

The pursuit of embodying the “alpha male” archetype is one of the important aspects of the patriarchal society. From a young age, men are conditioned to embrace qualities like toughness, stoicism, assertiveness, and dominance, as these traits have been established as the factors of “real men” by a society that has envisioned these things as the true metrics of masculinity (Marsales 10). The conditioning of hegemonic masculinity shapes the behavior and mindset of men, compelling them to follow the expectations of society. This notion, which is deeply rooted in our society, continues to shape our societal norms and expectations. In the modern era. The alpha male culture has found new life and visibility, particularly through the lens of social media and online platforms. Figures like Andrew Tate, a renowned kickboxing world champion turned entrepreneur and self proclaimed “alpha male”, exemplify this culture, influencing millions of followers. These followers have a wide range of demographics from various age groups and socioeconomic backgrounds. <u>This paper aims to examine the prevalence and ramifications of alpha male culture in modern society, focusing on its manifestations in social media.</u> It will delve into the ways this culture perpetuates gender stereotypes and power dynamics, influencing individuals’ behavior and societal expectations, exemplified by influential figures like Andrew Tate and others.

The emergence of social media plays a significant role in facilitating connections among like-minded individuals who share common beliefs and advocate for similar causes. It plays an integral part in shaping how modern society perceives various topics, whether they are of immediate importance and not. While actions such as “speaking out” and “breaking the silence” are not new practices, recent technologies bring modern ways for the public to come to know about different matters. Online participation and exposure to others’ passages give individuals courage to share experiences, post stories of their own, and build awareness. For example, many scholars have documented the rise of various digital feminist campaigns and hashtags on social media. In discussions regarding sexual violence against women, it is commonly observed that women are motivated to share their own experiences upon seeing others doing so, building a sense of feminine solidarity (Quan-Haase et al. 3-8). On the other hand, social media and networks also serve as a platform for propagating misogynistic ideologies and communities. Disseminating tolerance for sexual harassment, unwanted sexual attention, sexual coercion, gender trolling, and the likes are only a few examples of online misogyny. While various platforms hold educational, social, and entertainment purposes promoting safe and friendly spaces, it may also host hateful communities that empower toxic and bigoted values (Haase 2). Users have the freedom to discover like-minded individuals, forming connections with those who share similar values whether positive or negative. Consequently, validation for such values are sought and obtained.

Having delved into the role of social media in propagating and reinforcing different kinds of beliefs, it is crucial to introduce an analytical lens that has been at the forefront of challenging traditional gender roles and advocating for gender equality – Feminism. Feminism, in its various forms, provides a rich theoretical framework to dissect and understand the alpha male culture. It offers insights into how gender roles are constructed and perpetuated. Feminism, in its entirety, is a socio-political movement that challenges traditional norms and roles that have – historically, disadvantaged women. As Zhang and Rios said in their paper, “Feminist perspectives should be diverse. Nonetheless, feminists have been broadly classified into subgroups based on their ideologies, with two main categories referred to as liberal and radical feminism.”. These two strands are also chosen for their contrasting yet complementary views on gender roles and equality, making them particularly relevant to our discussion on alpha male culture. 

Radical Feminism, with its emphasis against the patriarchy, often sees the oppression of women as one of the fundamental human oppressions (e.g. racism) and feels the need to restructure the male-dominant social hierarchy (Zhang and Rios 144). This allows us to delve deeper into the societal structures that uphold and perpetuate alpha male culture. This kind of Feminism offers a systemic critique of alpha male culture, as it sees patriarchy as the root cause of gender inequality. Radical feminists argue that men’s need to control women is the basis of gender inequality. It is believed that the eradication of patriarchy is necessary to liberate women, children, and transgenders. Furthermore, radical feminists aim to address the root causes of oppression through systemic change and activism (Guy-Evans ch. 1).

On the other hand, Liberal Feminism focuses on individual rights and legal reforms (Zhang and Rios 144). This offers a pragmatic perspective on how we can challenge and reshape the norms associated with alpha male culture within the existing social and political framework. By examining the alpha male culture through the lenses of Radical and Liberal Feminism, we can gain a more comprehensive understanding of this phenomenon and its implications on gender equality. It emphasizes individual rights, dignity, and equality. Liberal feminists challenge unjust gender-based restrictions based on assumptions about men’s and women’s “proper” roles. Compared to radical feminists, they focus on advocating individual rights, legal equality, and workplace norms. Liberal Feminism challenges the dominance and privilege often associated with the alpha male culture (O’Reilly, ch. 4).

These strands of feminism date back to the first and second waves of feminism, and they have significantly influenced the third wave around the 1990s (Brunell). The fourth wave, which began around the early 2010s, is characterized by a focus on the empowerment of women, the use of Internet tools, and intersectionality. Feminism gained a massive popularity as it broadened its focus to other groups such as homosexuals, transgenders, and people of color. We’ve seen a significant rise in the visibility of both liberal and radical feminism. This is largely due to the power of social media, which has provided a platform for these ideologies to be shared and discussed on a global scale.

However, this shift has not been without backlash. In response to the perceived threat to traditional gender roles and alpha male culture, we’ve seen the emergence of what is often referred to as ‘toxic masculinity’. This term is used to describe certain behaviors and attitudes associated with an exaggerated form of masculinity. According to Ludeman and Elandson’s “alpha syndrome continuum”, alpha males tend to fluctuate between healthy and unhealthy alpha tendencies. “Alpha males” tend to be protective of what they have and can react aggressively when they feel threatened. The ‘alpha male’ is often characterized by dominance and leadership, traits that are traditionally associated with masculinity. However, when these traits are expressed in a way that is harmful or oppressive to others, it crosses into the realm of toxic masculinity. This is often seen in individuals who feel defensive or threatened by the changing gender dynamics.

To illustrate this, consider the story of a modern woman in her late 20s. She has excelled in her studies, driven by the ambition to become a “strong, independent woman” – a phrase often associated with feminism. Her success leads her to a fulfilling career, prompting her to question the need for a male provider. In response, many men, witnessing the rise of such women, may feel insecure. The traditional role of the provider, which they had assumed, seems to be slipping away. This prompts the question, “What is my role then if not the provider?”. The rise of “strong, independent women”, mostly propelled by radical and liberal feminists, has left many men feeling lost, particularly those identified as “incels” or the “involuntary celibate”. These individuals may resort to aggressive behavior towards feminists and women in general, in an attempt to reclaim their perceived role (Zhand and Rios 154). Thus, the surge of toxic masculinity. 

Such types of males violently attack anyone including other males. The blame for the decline of the patriarchy was bestowed to “Soyboys” and “Beta Males”, both described as men opposite of alphas (Marsales 2). These types of males are perceived to cry and complain frequently,  not keeping to themselves as an alpha would. A man will also be labeled as such if he tends to rely on women instead of himself. 

Social media influencers rode this wave of movement in order to garner the audience of toxic males in modern society. They have built their entire online personality on toxic masculinity, upholding alpha male culture as their propaganda. While these personalities widen their audience, they are also continuing to empower fellow alpha male believers. Various online gimmicks spread across different platforms promote toxic masculinity and the alpha male culture. Podcasts, TikTok trends, and hashtags are a few examples of how males advocate for these beliefs. While the topic is not new to most, as these contents gain increasing traction and momentum, the culture may now be considered more widely known than ever before. 

Andrew Tate, referred to as the “King of Toxic Masculinity” by one of his admirers, is a well-known online personality who upholds the alpha male culture (Sommer). He is also considered by many as the face and poster boy of this lifestyle. He has gained internet fame by propagating misogyny, leading millions of males towards the belief that females are barely sentient and don’t have independent thought (Bond). Most of his social media content includes coaching and instruction, teaching men how to purposely manipulate and degrade women. While many personalities across the internet share the same beliefs as Tate, his personal lifestyle sets him apart from other “alpha males”. He presents himself as a wealthy playboy, portraying a life coveted by many modern men. His battle cries include perceiving one’s self as strong and successful, promoting hustling and gaining money alongside despising and manipulating women. Men are encouraged to lie to women and deem them stupid, as they are considered nothing but empty vessels. Consequently, Tate’s followers now attribute his success and wealth to his practices, believing that by glorifying and adhering to his teachings, they can achieve a life similar to his. Now more than ever, it is evident that social media, alongside figures such as Andrew Tate, has amplified toxic masculinity and the harmful culture it fosters.

In conclusion, the rise of toxic “alpha male” culture is a reactionary response to the perceived threats posed by the advancement of feminism and changing gender norms in modern society. As radical and liberal feminist movements have directly opposed traditional patriarchal structures and advocated for greater gender equality, certain segments of the male population have felt defensive and insecure about their place in society. This insecurity has manifested in the form of ‘toxic’ masculinity, an exaggerated and harmful expression of stereotypical masculine traits such as dominance, aggression, and the subjugation of women. Men who identify as “alpha males” often exhibit these toxic tendencies, lashing out at women, feminists, and even other men who do not conform to their narrow definition of masculinity.

Social media has played a significant role in amplifying and propagating this toxic alpha male culture. Influencers and online communities have capitalized on this movement, promoting misogynistic and regressive ideologies under the guise of reclaiming traditional masculine roles and values. They ‘demonize’ the concepts of “strong, independent women” and “beta males”, making harmful gender stereotypes and fueling a backlash against progress towards gender equality.

However, it is crucial to recognize that this toxic alpha male culture is inherently flawed and unsustainable. It is a defensive reaction rooted in the insecurity and refusal to adapt to a more progressive society. True masculinity should not be defined by dominance or the subjugation over others but rather with empathy, emotional intelligence, and willingness to embrace positive change. It is essential to challenge and dismantle the toxic alpha male culture through brave spaces. By fostering a more inclusive and understanding society, we can create a world and society, where there is respect for all individuals and gender equality.

# Works Cited
Bond, Kimberley. “Inside the world of Andrew Tate and the alpha male movement”. <p style = "margin-left: 30px; margin-top: -20px">Metro, 20 June 2023, https://metro.co.uk/2023/06/20/inside-the-world-of-andrew-tate-and-the -alpha-male-movement-3-18981654/. Accessed 11 May 2024.

Brunell, Laura. "third wave of feminism". Encyclopedia Britannica, 28 Mar. 2024, <p style = "margin-left: 30px; margin-top: -20px">https://www.britannica.com/topic/third-wave-of-feminism. Accessed 11 May 2024.

Guy-Evans, Olivia. “Radical Feminism: Definition, Theory & Examples.” Simply <p style = "margin-left: 30px; margin-top: -20px">Psychology, 13 Feb. 2024, www.simplypsychology.org/radical-feminism.html.

Haaze, Christian Dieter. “Virtual Manhood Acts within Social Networks: The <p style = "margin-left: 30px; margin-top: -20px">Enactment of Toxic Masculinity on Reddit.” James Madison University, ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 2021.

Marsales, Emma. “Join the Brotherhood!: How ‘Alpha Male’ Podcasts are Targeting <p style = "margin-left: 30px; margin-top: -20px">Men.” The Ethnograph, vol. 7, no. 1, 6 June 2023, pp. 6–13, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.14288/ejas.v7i1.198299.

O’Reilly, Maria. “Feminism and the Politics of Difference.” Oxford Research <p style = "margin-left: 30px; margin-top: -20px">Encyclopedia of International Studies, 22 Dec. 2017, https://doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/9780190846626.013.177.

Quan-Haase, Anabel, et al. “Mapping #Metoo: A synthesis review of digital feminist <p style = "margin-left: 30px; margin-top: -20px">research across social media platforms.” New Media &amp; Society, vol. 23, no. 6, 9 Jan. 2021, pp. 1700–1720, https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444820984457.

Sommer, Will. “Police Raid MAGA ‘King of Toxic Masculinity’ in Human-Trafficking <p style = "margin-left: 30px; margin-top: -20px">Investigation”. The Daily Beast, 22 Apr 2022, https://www.thedailybeast.com/police- raid-maga-king-of-toxic-masculinity-in-human-trafficking-investigation. Accessed 11 May 2024.

Zhang, Yiyue, and Kimberly Rios. “Understanding perception
s of radical and liberal <p style = "margin-left: 30px; margin-top: -20px">feminists: The nuanced roles of warmth and competence.” Sex Roles, vol. 86, no. 3–4, 3 Nov. 2021, pp. 143–158, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11199-021-01257-y. 
